The Project Gutenberg eBook of Volume of anecdotes, Multum in parvo
library, vol. 2, no. 24, Dec., 1895, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Volume of anecdotes, Multum in parvo library, vol. 2, no. 24,
       Dec., 1895

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: November 7, 2022 [eBook #69313]

Language: English

Produced by: Demian Katz, Craig Kirkwood, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (Images courtesy
             of the Digital Library@Villanova University.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VOLUME OF ANECDOTES, MULTUM
IN PARVO LIBRARY, VOL. 2, NO. 24, DEC., 1895 ***


Transcriber’s Note:

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

Additional Transcriber’s Notes are at the end.

       *       *       *       *       *

MULTUM IN PARVO LIBRARY.

Entered at the Boston Post office as second class matter.

Vol. 2. DEC., 1895. Published Monthly. No. 24.




VOLUME OF ANECDOTES.


  Smallest Magazine in the world. Subscription price
  50 cts. per year. Single Copies 5 cts. each.

  PUBLISHED BY
  A.B. COURTNEY,
  Room 74, 45 Milk Street,
  BOSTON, MASS.




HUMOR OF THE BATTLEFIELD.


Many humorous incidents, says a writer in the _Century Magazine_,
occurred on battlefields. A Confederate colonel ran ahead of his
regiment at Malvern Hill, and, discovering that the men were not
following him as closely as he wished, he uttered a fierce oath and
exclaimed: “Come on! Do you want to live forever?” The appeal was
irresistible, and many a poor fellow who had laughed at the colonel’s
queer exhortation laid down his life soon after.

A shell struck the wheel of a Federal fieldpiece toward the close of
the engagement at Fair Oaks, shivering the spokes and dismantling the
cannon. “Well, isn’t it lucky that didn’t happen before we used up
all our ammunition,” said one of the artillerists as he crawled from
beneath the gun.

When General Pope was falling back before Lee’s advance in the Virginia
Valley, his own soldiers thought his bulletins and orders somewhat
strained in their rhetoric. At one of the numerous running engagements
that marked the disastrous campaign, a private in one of the Western
regiments was mortally wounded by a shell. Seeing the man’s condition,
a chaplain knelt beside him, and, opening his Bible at random, read out
Sampson’s slaughter of the Philistines with the jaw-bone of an ass.
He had not quite finished, when, as the story runs, the poor fellow
interrupted the reading by saying: “Hold on, chaplain. Don’t deceive a
dying man. Isn’t the name of John Pope signed to that?”

A column of troops was pushing forward over the long and winding road
in Thoroughfare Gap to head off Lee after his retreat across the
Potomac at the close of the Gettysburg campaign. Suddenly the signal
officer who accompanied the general in command discovered that some of
his men, posted on a high hill in the rear, were reporting the presence
of a considerable body of Confederate troops on top of the bluffs
to their right. A halt was at once sounded, and the leading brigade
ordered forward to uncover the enemy’s position. The regiments were
soon scrambling up the steep incline, officers and men gallantly racing
to see who could reach the crest first. A young lieutenant and some
half dozen men gained the advance, but at the end of what they deemed
a perilous climb they were thrown into convulsions of laughter at
discovering that what the signal men took for Confederate troops were
only a tolerably large flock of sheep. As the leaders in this forlorn
hope rolled on the grass in a paroxysm of merriment they laughed all
the louder at seeing the pale but determined faces of their comrades,
who, of course, came up fully expecting a desperate hand-to-hand
struggle. It is perhaps needless to say the brigade supped on mutton
that evening.

As the army was crossing South Mountain the day before the battle of
Antietam, General McClellan rode along the side of the moving column.
Overtaking a favorite Zouave regiment, he exclaimed, with his natural
_bonhommie_: “Well, and how is Old Fifth this evening?” “First-rate,
General,” replied one of the Zouaves. “But we’d be better off if
we weren’t living so much on supposition.” “Supposition?” said the
General, in a puzzled tone. “What do you mean by that?” “It’s easily
explained, sir. You see we expected to get our rations yesterday; but
as we didn’t, we’re living on the supposition that we did.” “Ah, I
understand; you shall have your rations, Zouzous, to-night,” replied
the General, putting spurs to his horse to escape the cheers of his
regiment. And he kept his promise.




NIGHT ON THE FIELD OF FREDERICKSBURG.


Many years have now passed, writes General Chamberlain, of Maine, since
“Fredericksburg.” Of what then was, not much is left but memory. Faces
and forms of men and things that then were have changed--perchance to
dust. New life has covered some; the rest look but lingering farewells.

But, whatever changes may beautify those storm-swept and barren slopes,
there is one character from which they can never pass. Death gardens,
haunted by glorious hosts, they must abide. No bloom can there unfold
which does not wear the rich token of the inheritance of heroic blood;
no breeze be wafted that does not bear the breath of the immortal life
there breathed away.

Of all that splendid but unavailing valor no one has told the story;
nor can I. The pen has no wing to follow where that sacrifice and
devotion sped their flight. But memory may rest down on some night
scenes too quiet and sombre with shadow to be vividly depicted, and
yet which have their interests from very contrast with the tangled and
lurid lights of battle.

The desperate charge was over. We had not reached the enemy’s
fortifications, but only that fatal crest where we had seen five lines
of battle mount but to be cut to earth as by a sword-swoop of fire. We
had that costly honor which sometimes falls to the “reserve”--to go
in when all is havoc and confusion, through storm and slaughter, to
cover the broken and depleted ranks of comrades and take the battle
from their hands. Thus we had replaced the gallant few still lingering
on the crest, and received that withering fire which nothing could
withstand by throwing ourselves flat in a slight hollow of ground
within pistol shot of the enemy’s works, and mingled with the dead and
dying that strewed the field, we returned the fire till it reddened
into night, and at last fell away through darkness and silence.

But out of that silence from the battle’s crash and roar rose new
sounds more appalling still; rose or fell, you knew not which, or
whether from the earth or air; a strange ventriloquism, of which you
could not locate the source, a smothered moan that seemed to come
from distances beyond reach of the natural sense, a wail so far and
deep and wide, as if a thousand discords were flowing together into a
keynote weird, unearthly, terrible to hear and bear, yet startling in
its nearness; the writhing concord broken by cries for help, pierced by
shrieks of paroxysm; some begging for a drop of water, some calling on
God for pity; and some on friendly hands to finish what the enemy had
so horribly begun; some with delirious, dreamy voices murmuring loved
names, as if the dearest were bending over them; some gathering their
last strength to fire a musket to call attention to them where they lay
helpless and deserted; and underneath all the time, the deep bass note
from closed lips too hopeless or too heroic to articulate their agony.

Who could sleep, or who would? Our position was isolated and exposed.
Officers must be on the alert with their command. But the human took
the mastery of the officials; sympathy of soldiership. Command could
be devolved, but pity not. So with a staff officer I sallied forth
to see what we could do where the helpers seemed so few. Taking some
observation in order not to lose the bearing of our own position, we
guided our steps by the most pitious of the cries. Our part was but
little--to relieve a painful posture, to give a cooling draught to
fevered lips, to compress a severed artery, as we had learned to do,
though in bungling fashion; to apply a rude bandage, which might yet
prolong the life to the saving; to take a token or farewell message for
some stricken home--it was but little, yet it was an endless task. We
had moved to the right and rear of our own position--the part of the
field immediately above the city. The farther we went the more need
and the calls multiplied.

Numbers half-awakening from the lethargy of death or of despair by
sounds of succor, begged us to take them quickly to a surgeon, and,
when we could not do that, imploring us to do the next most merciful
service and give them quick dispatch out of their misery. Right glad
were we when, after midnight, the shadowy ambulances came gliding
along and the kindly hospital stewards, with stretchers and soothing
appliances, let us feel that we might return to our proper duty.

The night chill had now woven a misty veil over the field. Fortunately,
a picket fence we had encountered in our charge from the town had
compelled us to abandon our horses, and so had saved our lives on
the crest; but our overcoats had been strapped to the saddles, and
we missed them now. Most of the men, however, had their overcoats or
blankets--we were glad of that. Except the few sentries along the
front, the men had fallen asleep--the living with the dead. At last,
outwearied and depressed with the desolate scene, my own strength sank,
and I moved two dead men a little and lay down between them, making
a pillow of the breast of a third. The skirt of his overcoat drawn
over my face helped also to shield me from the bleak winds. There was
some comfort even in this companionship. But it was broken sleep.
The deepening chill drove many forth to take the garments of those
who could no longer need them, that they might keep themselves alive.
More than once I was startled from my unrest by some one turning back
the coat skirt from my face, peering, half vampire-like, to my fancy,
through the darkness to discover if it, too, were of the silent and
unresisting; turning away more disconcerted at my living word than if a
voice had spoken from the dead.

And now we are aware of other figures wandering, ghost-like, over the
field. Some on errands like our own, drawn by compelling appeals;
some seeking a comrade with uncertain steps amid the unknown, and
ever and anon bending down to scan the pale visage closer, or, it may
be, by the light of a brief match, whose blue, flickering flame could
scarcely give the features a more recognizable or human look; some
man desperately wounded, yet seeking with faltering step, before his
fast ebbing blood shall have left him too weak to move, some quiet or
sheltered spot out of sound of the terrible appeals he could neither
answer nor endure, or out of reach of the raging battle coming with
the morning; one creeping, yet scarcely moving, from one lifeless form
to another, if, perchance, he might find a swallow of water in the
canteen which still swung from the dead soldier’s side; or another, as
with just returning or last remaining consciousness, vainly striving to
raise from a mangled heap, that he may not be buried with them while
yet alive, or some man yet sound of body, but pacing feverishly his
ground because in such a bivouac his spirit could not sleep. And so we
picked our way back amid the stark, upturned faces of our little living
line.

Having held our places all the night, we had to keep to them all the
more closely the next day; for it would be certain death to attempt to
move away. As it was, it was only by making breastworks and barricades
of the dead men that covered the field that we saved any alive. We
did what we could to take a record of these men. A Testament that had
fallen from the breast pocket of the soldier who had been my pillow I
sent soon after to his home--he was not of my command--and it proved to
be the only clew his parents ever had of his fate.

The next midnight, after thirty-six hours of this harrowing work, we
were bidden to withdraw into the town for refreshment and rest. But
neither rest nor motion was to be thought of till we had paid fitting
honor to our dead. We laid them on the spot where they had won, on the
sheltered edge of the crest, and committed their noble forms to the
earth, and their story to their country’s keeping.

  “We buried them darkly, at dead of night,
   The sod with our bayonets turning.”

Splinters of boards, torn by shot and shell from the fences we had
crossed, served as headstones, each name hurriedly carved under
brief match lights, anxiously hidden from the foe. It was a strange
scene around that silent and shadowy sepulchre. “We will give them a
starlight burial,” it was said; but heaven ordained a more sublime
illumination. As we bore them in dark and sad procession, their own
loved north took up the escort, and lifting all her glorious lights,
led the triumphal march over the bridge that spans the worlds--an
aurora borealis of marvelous majesty! Fiery lances and banners of blood
and flame, columns of pearly light, garlands and wreaths of gold, all
pointing upward and beckoning on. Who would not pass on as they did,
dead for their country’s life, lighted to burial by the meteor splendor
of their native sky?




PRESIDENT LINCOLN AND THE SOLDIERS.


The soldiers who were bearing the heat and burden of the war always
held a near place in Mr. Lincoln’s heart and sympathy. Upon one
occasion, when he had just written a pardon for a young soldier who
had been condemned by court-martial to be shot for sleeping at the post
as a sentinel, Mr. Lincoln remarked:

“I could not think of going into eternity with the blood of that poor
young man on my skirts. It is not to be wondered at that a boy raised
on a farm, probably in the habit of going to bed at dark, should, when
required to watch, fall asleep; and I cannot consent to shoot him for
such an act.” The Rev. Newman Hall, in his funeral sermon upon Mr.
Lincoln, said that this young soldier was found dead on the field of
Fredericksburg with Mr. Lincoln’s photograph next to his heart, on
which he had inscribed, “God bless President Lincoln.”

At another time there were twenty-four deserters sentenced to be shot,
and the warrants for their execution were sent to the President to be
signed. He refused, and the general of the division went to Washington
to see Mr. Lincoln. At the interview he said to the President that
unless these men were made an example of, the army itself would be
in danger. Mercy to the few is cruelty to the many. But Mr. Lincoln
replied: “There are already too many weeping widows in the United
States. For God’s sake don’t ask me to add to the number, for I won’t
do it.”

“I am astonished at you, Ward,” said Mr. Lincoln; “you ought to have
known better. Hereafter, when you have to hit a man, use a club and not
your fist.”




A WOMAN’S COURAGE AT GETTYSBURG.


Mrs. Peter Thorn, of Gettysburg, lived in the house at the entrance
of the borough cemetery. The house was used as headquarters by
General O. O. Howard. Mrs. Thorn’s husband was away from home at that
time (serving in the 148th regiment of Pennsylvania volunteers, and
stationed in Virginia), leaving her with two quite young children.
During the first day of the fight General Howard wanted some one to
show him and tell about different roads leading from Gettysburg, and
asked a number of men and boys who were in the cellar of the house to
go with him and point them out. But these persons were all fearful and
refused to go. Then Mrs. Thorn showed her courage and patriotism by
voluntarily offering to show the roads. This offer was at first refused
by General Howard, who said he did not wish a woman to do what a man
had not the courage to do. Mrs. Thorn persisted in her offer, saying:
“Somebody must show you, and I can do it; I was born and brought up
here, and know the roads as well as anybody.” Her offer was accepted,
and with the general and his horse between her and the fire of the
enemy, Mrs. Thorn went from one spot to another pointing out the
different roads. When passing along the line of troops the general was
greeted with: “Why do you take a woman for a guide? This is no place
for her.” “I know it,” said the officer, “but I could not get a man to
come; they were all afraid.” This answer to them started cheers for
Mrs. Thorn, which lasted several minutes and showed that our soldiers
admired the courage shown at such a time.




STONEWALL JACKSON’S BRIDGE-BUILDER.


A useful man to Stonewall Jackson was old Miles, the Virginia
bridge-builder. The bridges were swept away so often by floods or
burned by the enemy that Miles was as necessary to the Confederate army
as Jackson himself. One day the Union troops had retreated, and burned
a bridge across the Shenandoah. Jackson, determined to follow them,
summoned Miles.

“You must put all your men on that bridge,” said he; “they must work
all night, and the bridge must be completed by daylight. My engineer
will furnish you with the plan, and you can go right ahead.”

Early next morning Jackson, in a very doubtful frame of mind, met the
old bridge-builder.

“Well,” said the general, “did the engineer give you the plan for the
bridge?”

“General,” returned Miles slowly, “the bridge is done. I don’t know
whether the pictur’ is or not.”

From that time forth General Jackson allowed Miles to build the bridges
after his own fashion, without annoying him with “pictur’s.”




HOW CUSTER AND YOUNG TOOK DINNER.


Generals Pierce Young, of Georgia, and Custer were messmates and
classmates and devoted friends at West Point. In the war they were
major-generals of cavalry on opposing sides. One day General Young was
invited to breakfast at the Hunter mansion in Virginia. The beautiful
young ladies had prepared a smoking breakfast to which the general was
addressing himself with ardor when a shell burst through the house.
Glancing through a window he saw Custer charging toward the house at
the head of his staff. Out of the window Young went, calling to the
young ladies, “Tell Custer I leave this breakfast for him.” Custer
enjoyed it heartily, and looked forward with pleasure to the dinner in
the distance. In the meantime, Young, smarting over the loss of his
breakfast and his hasty retreat, drove the Federal line back, and by
dinner time was in sight of the Hunter mansion again. Custer, who was
just sitting down to dinner, laughed and said: “That’s Pierce Young
coming back. I knew he wouldn’t leave me here in peace. Here’s my
picture; give it to him, and tell him his old classmate leaves his love
with his excellent dinner.” And out of the window he went like a flash,
while the Georgia general walked in and sat down to dinner.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Punctuation has been made consistent.

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

p. 13: The one-sentence paragraph that starts “I am astonished at
you...” does not belong in this story. It is from another story
entitled “Some of Lincoln’s Jokes” (George B. Herbert, _The Popular
History of the Civil War in America_, F. M. Lupton, Publisher, New
York, 1885, p. 476).

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VOLUME OF ANECDOTES, MULTUM IN
PARVO LIBRARY, VOL. 2, NO. 24, DEC., 1895 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.